Docsp 20245 (#202)
mongodb/docs-java: source/fundamentals/connection/tuning.txt

=================
Connection Storms
=================

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

.. _connection-tuning-java:

Overview
--------

In this guide, you can learn about **connection storms** and settings that
can help avoid them.

Connection Storms
-----------------

A **connection storm** is an event in which application servers
start an increasing number of connection requests, but the host server

> CPU is unable to schedule them.

Author: I think it would be valuable to add it more naturally than the example, but I can't think of something concrete to add since there are many scenarios that can lead to a connection storm.

.. example::

   Consider an application that uses MongoDB, and is served from an
   auto scaling service. A sudden spike in traffic could cause the scaling
   service to stand up many new application instances. This sudden burst
   in application instances attempting to establish connections to MongoDB
   is one example of a connection storm.

Common Causes and Effects
+++++++++++++++++++++++++

Common causes for connection storms in MongoDB include:

> - Incorrect application behavior

Author: I've modified the wording here to make it more "open".

- Network latency
- Insufficient hardware for the workload
- Failover events

> In MongoDB, connection storms can have multiple effects. For example:
> 
> - The high volume of connection requests leads to latency in processing.
> - Replication connections between nodes may be blocked or slowed, so replication
>   operations cannot proceed.
> - Administrative connections to the database are blocked, preventing
>   a user from logging in.
> - Monitoring connections to the database are blocked, degrading visibility
>   into the problem.
> - CPU or memory oversubscription due to connection management can lead
>   to a ``mongod`` crashing and restarting. This extra workload on the server
>   can be exclusively attributed to connection handling.
> - In Atlas, connection requests can exceed instance tier limits, causing
>   refusal of new connections.

Reviewer: I suggest an alternate framing here, which peels out the activity (Rate of connections vs. Total number of connections) and then describes the possible effects of either of them together (which are similar), with less technical detail about how the effects can unfold. Should help future-proof these docs as improvements are made over time.

I don't have the right link formatting 😊 

```suggestion
The effects of connection storms follow from either:

- the performance impact of the rate at which new connections are being made. Rapidly incoming connection requests can cause bottlenecks during connection establishment. Since it is common to retry failed connections, connection storms can persist until some load is shed.
- inability to connect to a database node when that node's [maxIncomingConnections|https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/configuration-options/#mongodb-setting-net.maxIncomingConnections] setting is reached.

Either of these concerns can lead to practical issues like:

- Hardware overuse, including heavy queuing, crashing and restarting due to lack of memory, etc.
- Replica set failover due to interference with intra-node system operations.
- Inability to connect to and diagnose an issue on the database side.
- Loss of connectivity for monitoring tools and other support services.
- Interference with monitoring and administration activities.
```

Avoid Connection Storms
-----------------------

While no universal solution exists as each problem is unique to a deployment,
you can use a combination of settings and methods to help you avoid connection

> storms. These include:

Reviewer: If we can move this content into https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/configuration-options/#mongodb-setting-net.maxIncomingConnections, then I feel like the Settings section there can do some of the lifting here, and this new content could focus on A) the addition of maxConnecting to the list and B) the language that distinguishes between maxConnecting and maxPoolSize

- **maxPoolSize**: The maximum number of connections in the connection pool. Beginning
  with a lower value is recommended to reduce the maximum pressure each server
  may experience from each connected client applications.
  |
  Fewer overall connections in the pool means the database server is using
  less resources maintaining connections.

- **maxConnecting**: The maximum number of connections the driver can concurrently

>   establish to an individual server before making them available in the connection pool.

Reviewer: I suggest "The maximum number of new connections the driver will attempt to make to a given server at the same time"

An example may help:

"For example, a maxConnecting setting of 5 will ensure that client threads with new database operations will block if 5 connections are currently being opened for 5 other requests."

  |
  By keeping this option low, you reduce the risk temporary load spikes
  from  overwhelming the database.

> - **maxTime()**: The *cumulative* time limit for processing operations on

Reviewer: I don't have a prescriptive edit for this one, I just suggest making it clearer that maxTime is sending a desired time to the server and the server is the component terminating the operation.

Specify ``maxPoolSize`` in your connection URI or with the
`ConnectionPoolSettings.Builder maxSize() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/connection/ConnectionPoolSettings.Builder.html#maxSize(int)>`__ method.

maxConnecting Recommendations
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

``maxConnecting`` specifies the maximum number of connections to each server that
the driver will concurrently establish before making them available in
the connection pool.

.. important:: Start with Lower Values

   Start with lower values for ``maxConnecting``. This helps to avoid bursts
   in connections in response to a temporary increase in traffic.

Do not confuse ``maxConnecting`` with ``maxPoolSize``, which specifies the
maximum number of connections the driver can maintain in the connection pool.

.. example::

   Consider a failover scenario in a three member replica set with applications under
   heavy load. Without ``maxConnecting``, ``maxPoolSize * application servers``
   connections would be established. With default settings for ``maxPoolSize``
   and three application servers, that would be 300 new connections, concurrently.

>    With ``maxConnecting`` set to "3", the new primary will receive
>    ``maxConnecting * application servers`` connections concurrently, or nine.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   When the ``maxConnecting`` setting is set to "3", the application limits the maxiumum
   concurrent connections to ``maxConnecting * (number of application servers)`` to nine
```

Specify ``maxConnecting`` in your connection URI or with the
`ConnectionPoolSettings.Builder maxConnecting() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/connection/ConnectionPoolSettings.Builder.html#maxConnecting(int)>`__ method.

maxTime()
+++++++++

``maxTime()`` specifies the *cumulative* time limit for processing operations
in MongoDB. If an operation exceeds this limit, MongoDB terminates the
operation.

.. tip::

   Use ``maxTime()`` to limit operation execution time. Do not use ``socketTimeoutMS``.

   Closing a socket forces a reconnect, which slows all operations, and does not have any

>    impact on the operation that the developer is attempting to abort. MongoDB will continue

Reviewer 2: Is this the "developer" or "application"? I think the developer can specify a setting, but the application performs the action.

   to process the operation, potentially causing errors if the driver attempts to
   retry the operation.

   ``socketTimeoutMS`` specifies the maximum time the driver will wait for socket reads.
   The default is ``0``, meaning no timeout.

>    Setting this to a value that is too low results in **connection thrashing**,
>    where the socket is closed and removed from the connection pool, and a new
>    connection is initiated. For example, setting a timeout of 200 milliseconds

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Setting this to a value that is too low results in **connection thrashing**.
   Connection thrashing is a condition that occurs when the application
   closes a socket and establishes a new connection to replace it, prematurely.
   For example, setting a timeout of 200 milliseconds
```

   and issuing a query that takes 300 milliseconds to complete would result in
   the socket being closed and a new connection being initiated.

> ``maxTime()`` is available on the following classes:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can specify ``maxTime()`` on the following classes:
```

==================
Tuning Connections
==================

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

.. _connection-tuning-java:

Overview
--------

In this guide, you can learn about **connection pools** and **connection storms**.

Connection Pools
----------------

> Connection pools are fundamental to the performance of your application.
> A **connection pool** is a cache of database connections maintained by the driver
> so that future requests can reuse already established connections.

Reviewer 2: A couple items here:

1) Try to define a term before we talk about its benefits. The pattern our team has been using which I think aligns with the style guide is to use bold formatting for the first mention; optional if you define it in the same sentence as the first mention. Then, we define the term in the next sentence.
2) Make sure the reader understands how it relates to MongoDB and why it can help performance.

```suggestion
A connection pool is a cache of active connections maintained by the driver.
The driver uses connection pools to improve your application's performance
by running your MongoDB operations on one of its already-established connections.
```

.. example::

   Imagine you're with a group of friends at an event and make a phone
   call to a friend that was unable to attend due to an illness. Each
   person in the group would like to send their well-wishes. It is much
   more efficient for you to make the phone call and then pass your phone
   around to each friend instead of each individual making a separate

>    call one after the other.

Author: This comment is unique amongst all reviewers so far. I don't mind removing it but I wonder if this is a case of "I wouldn't do that"?

In MongoDB drivers, there are 4 key connection pool options:

- ``minPoolSize``: The minimum number of connections that may be
  associated with a pool at a given time, including in use and available
  connections. The default is ``0``.

- ``maxPoolSize``: The maximum number of connections that may be
  associated with a pool at a given time, including in use and available
  connections. The default is ``100``.

- ``maxIdleTimeMS``: The maximum number of milliseconds that a connection
  associated with a pool may be idle before being removed from the pool.
  The default is ``0``, which indicates that idle connections are not
  removed.

- ``maxConnecting``: The maximum number of connections the driver can concurrently establish
  to an individual server. The default is ``2``.

The amount of connections in each pool depends on the ``minPoolSize``,
``maxPoolSize`` and ``maxIdleTimeMS`` values.

The driver begins to establish ``minPoolSize`` connections to each ``mongod/mongos``
after it completes a successful monitoring check. The driver creates these connections ``maxConnecting``
connections at a time. This happens in the background and is not blocking.

.. example::

>    With a ``minPoolSize`` of **10**, the driver establishes 10 connections.

Author: They are defined prior to this example?

   If each connection takes ~50 ms to establish, the driver establishes
   all connections after ~250 ms. That is, 50 ms * 10 (the ``minPoolSize``)
   / 2 (``maxConnecting``).

Growth
++++++

> .. note:: Server Monitoring

Author: A reviewer wanted it made clear that Server Monitoring connections are not part of the connection pool and do not impact growth.

.. example::

   Consider an application that uses MongoDB, and is served from an
   auto scaling service. A sudden spike in traffic could cause the scaling
   service to stand up many new application instances. This sudden burst
   in application instances attempting to establish connections to MongoDB
   is one example of a connection storm.

Common Causes
+++++++++++++

Common causes for connection storms in MongoDB include:

- Incorrect application behavior
- Network latency
- Insufficient hardware for the workload
- Failover events

In MongoDB, connection storms can have multiple effects. For example:

- The high volume of connection requests leads to latency in processing.
- Replication connections between nodes may be blocked or slowed, so replication
  operations cannot proceed.
- Administrative connections to the database are blocked, preventing
  a user from logging in.
- Monitoring connections to the database are blocked, degrading visibility
  into the problem.
- CPU or memory oversubscription due to connection management can lead
  to a ``mongod`` crashing and restarting. This extra workload on the server
  can be exclusively attributed to connection handling.

> - In Atlas, connection requests can exceed instance class limits, causing

Author: good catch

   Start with lower values for ``maxConnecting``. This helps to avoid bursts
   in connections in response to a temporary increase in traffic.

Do not confuse ``maxConnecting`` with ``maxPoolSize``, which specifies the
maximum number of connections the driver can maintain in the connection pool.

.. example::

   Consider a failover scenario in a 3 member replica set with applications under
   heavy load. Without ``maxConnecting``, ``maxPoolSize * application servers``
   connections would be established. With default settings for ``maxPoolSize``
   and 3 application servers, that would be 300 new connections, concurrently.

   With ``maxConnecting`` set to 3, the new primary will receive
   ``maxConnecting * application servers`` connections concurrently, or 9.

Specify ``maxConnecting`` in your connection URI or with the
`ConnectionPoolSettings.Builder maxConnecting() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/connection/ConnectionPoolSettings.Builder.html#maxConnecting(int)>`__ method.

maxPoolSize
+++++++++++

:ref:`Properly sizing your connection pool <connection-pool-sizing-java>`
helps you avoid the risk of connection storms by limiting the amount of

> connections any application can establish.

Reviewer 2: Sometimes the alternation between passive and imperative language makes it difficult to locate the specific advice. Maybe the imperative style is better since we try to avoid passive voice when possible:
"Properly size your connection pool to avoid ..."

- `DistinctIterable <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-sync/com/mongodb/client/DistinctIterable.html#maxTime(long,java.util.concurrent.TimeUnit)>`__
- `FindIterable <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-sync/com/mongodb/client/FindIterable.html#maxTime(long,java.util.concurrent.TimeUnit)>`__
- `ListCollectionsIterable <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-sync/com/mongodb/client/ListCollectionsIterable.html#maxTime(long,java.util.concurrent.TimeUnit)>`__
- `ListDatabasesIterable <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-sync/com/mongodb/client/ListDatabasesIterable.html#maxTime(long,java.util.concurrent.TimeUnit)>`__
- `ListIndexesIterable <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-sync/com/mongodb/client/ListIndexesIterable.html#maxTime(long,java.util.concurrent.TimeUnit)>`__
- `MapReduceIterable <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-sync/com/mongodb/client/MapReduceIterable.html#maxTime(long,java.util.concurrent.TimeUnit)>`__
- `GridFSFindIterable <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-sync/com/mongodb/client/gridfs/GridFSFindIterable.html#maxTime(long,java.util.concurrent.TimeUnit)>`__

.. warning:: Do not use ``socketTimeoutMS`` to abort operations.

>    Some users have incorrectly used this option to try to abort operations

Reviewer 2: I wonder if this information should be incorporated in the "tip" admonition earlier in the section since it already suggests not using "socketTimeoutMS" to limit operation execution time.

Also, I think "some users" is unspecific (similar to "many people say..."), and pointing out their incorrect usage indicates some blame, which isn't useful.

   person in the group would like to send their well-wishes. It is much
   more efficient for you to make the phone call and then pass your phone
   around to each friend instead of each individual making a separate
   call one after the other.

Basics
++++++
The driver establishes a connection pool **per connected server**. This means
in a three member replica set, the driver maintains three connection pools,
one for each member of the replica set. In a sharded deployment, the driver
maintains one connection per ``mongos``.

In MongoDB drivers, there are 4 key connection pool options:

- ``minPoolSize``: The minimum number of connections that may be
  associated with a pool at a given time, including in use and available
  connections. The default is ``0``.

- ``maxPoolSize``: The maximum number of connections that may be
  associated with a pool at a given time, including in use and available
  connections. The default is ``100``.

- ``maxIdleTimeMS``: The maximum number of milliseconds that a connection
  associated with a pool may be idle before being removed from the pool.
  The default is ``0``, which indicates that idle connections are not
  removed.

> - ``maxConnecting``: The maximum number of connections to each server that

Reviewer 3: Rather than phrasing this as a number of connections that the driver _will_ establish at once, I think it would be better to say its the maximum that it _can_ (i.e. a limit).

e.g.
"The maximum number of connections that the driver can concurrently establish to an individual server.", or something like that.

   connection pool reaches ``maxPoolSize`` connections.

Reduction
+++++++++

Use ``maxIdleTimeMS`` to reduce the number of connections in the pool to
reduce resource requirements both on the application and on the database
machines. The driver has no default, but 30 minutes is a good starting point.

Connection Storms
-----------------

A **connection storm** is an event in which application servers
start an increasing number of connection requests, but the host server
CPU is unable to schedule them.

.. example::

   Consider an application that uses MongoDB, and is served from an
   auto scaling service. A sudden spike in traffic could cause the scaling
   service to stand up many new application instances. This sudden burst
   in application instances attempting to establish connections to MongoDB
   is one example of a connection storm.

Common Causes
+++++++++++++

Common causes for connection storms in MongoDB include:

- Incorrect application behavior
- Network latency
- Insufficient hardware for the workload
- Failover events

In MongoDB, connection storms can have multiple effects. For example:

- The high volume of connection requests leads to latency in processing.

> - Replication connections between nodes may be blocked or slowed, so replication

Reviewer 3: I think this has been fixed in recent versions of MongoDB, but you'll have to verify with the server team / tses.

Author: I'm asking someone from Server who recently reviewed some performance work to look at this.

Reviewer: I suggest an alternate framing here, which peels out the activity (Rate of connections vs. Total number of connections) and then describes the possible effects of either of them together (which are similar), with less technical detail about how the effects can unfold. Should help future-proof these docs as improvements are made over time:

---

The effects of connection storms follow from either:

* the performance impact of the rate at which new connections are being made. Rapidly incoming connection requests can cause bottlenecks during connection establishment. Since it is common to retry failed connections, connection storms can persist until some load is shed.
* inability to connect to a database node when that node's [maxIncomingConnections|https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/configuration-options/#mongodb-setting-net.maxIncomingConnections] setting is reached.

Either of these concerns can lead to practical issues like:

* Hardware overuse, including heavy queuing, crashing and restarting due to lack of memory, etc.
* Replica set failover due to interference with intra-node system operations.
* Inability to connect to and diagnose an issue on the database side.
* Loss of connectivity for monitoring tools and other support services.
* Interference with monitoring and administration activities.
